README.md, before:

## KLMPropagator

This tool implements the semantics of KLM (Variants: C, CL, CM, P, and M) via user-propagation in the Z3 SMT solver.

## Build

The build process was tested successfully built on Windows (VC++ 2022) and Linux (gcc-11.4).

Requirements apart from a C++ 17 compiler:
- cmake
- [Z3](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3/releases)
- Optional: [graphviz](https://graphviz.org/download/)

### Instructions

Open a console-window at some writeable location, clone the git-repository and navigate into the cloned repo 

```
git clone https://github.com/CEisenhofer/KLMPropagator.git
cd UP_KLM
```

(or just download the zip from GitHub) create a folder for the compiled output and run cmake (here for Linux)

```
mkdir release
cd release
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DZ3_INCLUDE_DIR="[path-to-z3]/include" -DZ3_LIBRARIES="[path-to-z3]/bin/libz3.so" ..
cmake --build .
```

Replace "[path-to-z3]" by the path to the downloaded z3 library.
The compiled program will be likely put in the sub-directory `src` of the directory where you invoked `cmake`

Note: The extension for Windows is ".lib" and for MAC is ".dylib". On Windows make sure that you download the correct version (x86 vs x64 - you probably want x64)

In case you want to also compile Z3 from source, make sure that you install it or you copy `z3++.h` and `z3_version.h` in the same directory as the other API-header files!
You do _not need_ to have yacc/flex installed. The parser files are precompiled and OS-independent. If you want to change the parser, you can install the two programs and use `gen_parser.sh` to update the files.

## Usage

You can run the program by calling it via command-line arguments.
```
KLM -l=[C|CL|CM|P|M] -t=ms --smtlib --visual path-to-input-file
```

This will solve the problem given in path `path-to-input-file`. The result will be output to console.
Additional arguments are:

- `-l` defines the KLM variant to be used. e.g., `-l=CM` makes the solver use the axioms of `CM`
- `-t` defines the timeout for solving the problem in milliseconds. e.g., `-t=1000` gives to solver 1000 milliseconds to solve the problem
- `--smtlib` makes the solver parse the input-file as an SMTLIB2 file rather than the custom input format (see below)
- `--visual` makes the solver output a graph witnessing the satisfiability of the input (see below)

### Model Visualization

In case the argument `--visual` is passed, the solver creates a file called `output-graph.dot` in the sanme directory as the tool.
You can compile this file into a visualization of the model (separating graph) with graphviz.

Use via command-line
```
dot -Tpdf output-graph.dot -o output-graph.pdf
```
to generate a PDF `output-graph.pdf` showing the model.
Note that graphviz is a separate program that has to be installed separately.
On Linux this can be done for example via: `sudo apt-get install graphviz`.

### Input Language

You can represent problems in two ways. A custom input-language or SMTLIB.

#### Custom Input Language
In the custom syntax each line in the file is one pair `(F1, F2)` where `F1` and `F2` are propositional formulas.
Use `~` for negation, `&` for conjunction, `|` for disjunction, `=>` for material implication, `=` for material equivalence and brackets as usual.
There is no operator precedence, so use brackets!
Each line consists of one tuple `(F1, F2)` which is written as `F1 -> F2` in case the tuple exists and 
`F1 -/> F2` in case it does not exist.

Example
```
(A & B) => C -> B
~B -> C | A
B -/> A & C
```

This corresponds to the query if the two pairs
```
((A & B) => C, B)
(~B, C | A)
```
entail the pair
```
(B, A & C)
```
by refuting the existence of a counterexample.

#### SMTLIB2
We can represent the problem by "misusing" SMTLIB2.

Assume the existence of a predefined function `(declare-fun node (Bool Bool) Bool)`.
The problem before can be written as

```
(declare-const A Bool)
(declare-const B Bool)
(declare-const C Bool)

(assert 
    (and (node (or C (not (and A B))) B)
    (node (not B) (or C A))      
    (not (node B (and A C))))
)
```

Don't worry about the fact that `A`, `B`, and `C` are defined as Boolean constants.
The tool automatically transform the input into another form internally.


#### Experiments
We tested our tool on randomly generated benchmarks (script: `Benchmark.cs`).
The benchmarks used in the paper are stored in the folder `bench` (contains both the inputs for IOCondProver [.iocond], KLMlean 2.0 [.c.klm/.cl.p.klm], NESCOND [.nescond] and KLMPropagator [.smt2]).
For generating new benchmarks invoke the script `Benchmark.cs` with the desired parameters (see respective file for an example).
The script will automatically compare the results of KLMPropagator against the other tools.

For manually running the prolog tools, call prolog (preferably "SICStus Prolog") with the respective script (KLMlean, IOCondProver, NESCOND) and use the content of the respective benchmark file as a query.
For KLMPropagator use the tool as described above.

Commit message:

Refer to examples in the readme

README.md, after:

## KLMPropagator

This tool implements the semantics of KLM (Variants: C, CL, CM, P, and M) via user-propagation in the Z3 SMT solver.

## Build

The build process was tested successfully built on Windows (VC++ 2022) and Linux (gcc-11.4).

Requirements apart from a C++ 17 compiler:
- cmake
- [Z3](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3/releases)
- Optional: [graphviz](https://graphviz.org/download/)

### Instructions

Open a console-window at some writeable location, clone the git-repository and navigate into the cloned repo 

```
git clone https://github.com/CEisenhofer/KLMPropagator.git
cd UP_KLM
```

(or just download the zip from GitHub) create a folder for the compiled output and run cmake (here for Linux)

```
mkdir release
cd release
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DZ3_INCLUDE_DIR="[path-to-z3]/include" -DZ3_LIBRARIES="[path-to-z3]/bin/libz3.so" ..
cmake --build .
```

Replace "[path-to-z3]" by the path to the downloaded z3 library.
The compiled program will be likely put in the sub-directory `src` of the directory where you invoked `cmake`

Note: The extension for Windows is ".lib" and for MAC is ".dylib". On Windows make sure that you download the correct version (x86 vs x64 - you probably want x64)

In case you want to also compile Z3 from source, make sure that you install it or you copy `z3++.h` and `z3_version.h` in the same directory as the other API-header files!
You do _not need_ to have yacc/flex installed. The parser files are precompiled and OS-independent. If you want to change the parser, you can install the two programs and use `gen_parser.sh` to update the files.

## Usage

You can run the program by calling it via command-line arguments.
```
KLM -l=[C|CL|CM|P|M] -t=ms --smtlib --visual path-to-input-file
```

This will solve the problem given in path `path-to-input-file`. The result will be output to console.
Additional arguments are:

- `-l` defines the KLM variant to be used. e.g., `-l=CM` makes the solver use the axioms of `CM`
- `-t` defines the timeout for solving the problem in milliseconds. e.g., `-t=1000` gives to solver 1000 milliseconds to solve the problem
- `--smtlib` makes the solver parse the input-file as an SMTLIB2 file rather than the custom input format (see below)
- `--visual` makes the solver output a graph witnessing the satisfiability of the input (see below)

### Model Visualization

In case the argument `--visual` is passed, the solver creates a file called `output-graph.dot` in the sanme directory as the tool.
You can compile this file into a visualization of the model (separating graph) with graphviz.

Use via command-line
```
dot -Tpdf output-graph.dot -o output-graph.pdf
```
to generate a PDF `output-graph.pdf` showing the model.
Note that graphviz is a separate program that has to be installed separately.
On Linux this can be done for example via: `sudo apt-get install graphviz`.

### Input Language

You can represent problems in two ways. A custom input-language or SMTLIB.

#### Custom Input Language
In the custom syntax each line in the file is one pair `(F1, F2)` where `F1` and `F2` are propositional formulas.
Use `~` for negation, `&` for conjunction, `|` for disjunction, `=>` for material implication, `=` for material equivalence and brackets as usual.
There is no operator precedence, so use brackets!
Each line consists of one tuple `(F1, F2)` which is written as `F1 -> F2` in case the tuple exists and 
`F1 -/> F2` in case it does not exist.

Example
```
(A & B) => C -> B
~B -> C | A
B -/> A & C
```

This corresponds to the query if the two pairs
```
((A & B) => C, B)
(~B, C | A)
```
entail the pair
```
(B, A & C)
```
by refuting the existence of a counterexample. (see nescond[1|2|3].klm and test.klm for examples)

#### SMTLIB2
We can represent the problem by "misusing" SMTLIB2.

Assume the existence of a predefined function `(declare-fun node (Bool Bool) Bool)`.
The problem before can be written as

```
(declare-const A Bool)
(declare-const B Bool)
(declare-const C Bool)

(assert 
    (and (node (or C (not (and A B))) B)
    (node (not B) (or C A))      
    (not (node B (and A C))))
)
```
[See test.smt2 for an example]

Don't worry about the fact that `A`, `B`, and `C` are defined as Boolean constants.
The tool automatically transform the input into another form internally.


#### Experiments
We tested our tool on randomly generated benchmarks (script: `Benchmark.cs`).
The benchmarks used in the paper are stored in the folder `bench` (contains both the inputs for IOCondProver [.iocond], KLMlean 2.0 [.c.klm/.cl.p.klm], NESCOND [.nescond] and KLMPropagator [.smt2]).
For generating new benchmarks invoke the script `Benchmark.cs` with the desired parameters (see respective file for an example).
The script will automatically compare the results of KLMPropagator against the other tools.

For manually running the prolog tools, call prolog (preferably "SICStus Prolog") with the respective script (KLMlean, IOCondProver, NESCOND) and use the content of the respective benchmark file as a query.
For KLMPropagator use the tool as described above.
